- Long-term commitment to improving farmer livelihoods and farming communities

    PARSIPPANY, N.J., Jan. 28 /PRNewswire-FirstCall/ -- Cadbury, the world's
leading confectionery company, has announced today the establishment of the
Cadbury Cocoa Partnership to secure the economic, social and environmental
sustainability of around a million cocoa farmers and their communities in
Ghana, India, Indonesia and the Caribbean.
    This ground-breaking initiative, which will be carried out in partnership
with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other partners, marks
100 years since the Cadbury brothers first began trading in Ghana and aims to
holistically support the development of sustainable cocoa growing communities.
    Research by the University of Sussex and the University of Accra into
"Sustainable Cocoa Production in Ghana," funded by Cadbury, showed that the
average production for a cocoa farmer has dropped to only 40% of potential
yield and that cocoa farming has become less attractive to the next potential
generation of farmers. The Cadbury Cocoa Partnership programme aims to address
some of the root causes of these issues -- improving farmer productivity and
helping to attract the next generation into cocoa farming.
    The Partnership will therefore focus on:

    1. Improving cocoa farmer incomes: by helping farmers increase their
       yields and produce top quality beans(1)
    2. Introducing new sources of rural income: through microfinance and
       business support to kick start new rural businesses and introduce
       additional income streams such as growing other crops
    3. Investing in community led development: to improve life in cocoa
       communities e.g. supporting education through schools and libraries,
       supporting the environment through biodiversity projects, and building
       wells for clean, safe water(2)
    4. Working in partnership: developing a pioneering model which will be led
       from the grass roots.  Farmers, governments, NGOs and international
       agencies will work together to decide how the funding is spent and work
       with local organisations to turn plans into action


    Announcing the partnership, Jim Chambers, President of the Americas Region
said: "Sustainable cocoa production is vital to the company's success in our
chocolate markets.  We need to not only ensure the supply of the most
important ingredient for our chocolate products, but also guarantee a
reliable, long term source of the right quality cocoa, produced to the high
standards our business, customers and our consumers expect."
    The majority of the Partnership funds (70%) will be invested into small
farms and farming villages in Ghana, which provide the cocoa beans for
Cadbury's UK chocolate, giving it its unique and much loved taste. Brands
using Ghanaian beans include Cadbury Dairy Milk, Wispa, Flake, Creme Egg and
Buttons.
James Boateng, Managing Director of Cadbury Ghana added: "In the centenary
of our relationship with the cocoa farming industry in Ghana, we are
incredibly proud to launch the Cadbury Cocoa Partnership in Accra today which
we hope will have a lasting impact on the lives of cocoa farmers."
    "I grew up on a cocoa farm, and owe my education to the prosperity which
cocoa brought to my family, and look forward to contributing to the future of
cocoa farming. In Ghana there is a phrase 'Coco obatanpa' which means 'Cocoa
is a good parent; it looks after you'.  We hope with this initiative Cadbury
and our partners can be a good parent to cocoa."
    Welcoming the initiative, UNDP's Resident Representative in Ghana Daouda
Toure said: "UNDP strives to promote inclusive, sustainable development, where
everyone benefits as a country gets to grips with fighting poverty. Ghana has
been producing cocoa for decades now and the industry has certainly gone some
way to improving the lives of the Ghanaian people, but with this new
public-private partnership approach developed with Cadbury, where both the
small producer and the consumer benefit, we hope to show just how effectively
sustainable cocoa production can be in generating improved opportunities for
local farmers, conserving the environment and building a brighter future for
younger generations."
    Cadbury is initially investing 1m pounds Sterling in 2008 as a seed fund
to establish the Cadbury Cocoa Partnership, with annual funding levels rising
to a steady rate of 5m pounds Sterling from 2010.

    Notes to Editor
    1. Cadbury recently funded research by the University of Sussex and the
       University of Accra into "Sustainable Cocoa Production in Ghana" which
       showed that the production of some cocoa farms is only 4-6 sacks a
       year. Cadbury is investing in research, tools, education and training
       to help farmers understand how to get more cocoa from their trees, and
       to improve the quality of their beans.

       The research also identified that cocoa farming has become less
       attractive to the next potential generation of farmers. This programme
       aims to address some of the root causes of this issue, to attract the
       next generation into cocoa farming.

       Most farms are only around 2-3 hectares in size so making best use of
       the land is vital to maximising income. Crops such as mangoes can
       benefit from growing beneath cocoa trees, whilst coconuts will help
       cocoa production by providing beneficial shade.

    2. Cadbury will have built over 850 wells at the close of 2008, with each
       well providing water for around 150-200 people.  The company has also
       donated books and provided support to help a number of communities
       build libraries and education facilities. In addition, Cadbury's
       Earthshare programme sends 20-30 colleagues a year to Ghana to
       participate in scientific research in the field on Cocoa Farming and
       Biodiversity in Ghana in cooperation with the international environment
       charity Earthwatch


    About Ghana Cocoa:
    Ghanaian cocoa trades at 10% above the global market price due to its
consistent high quality compared to other origins. The Ghanaian cocoa industry
is regulated by the government's Cocoa Board, which oversees all elements of
the cocoa chain from licensing the buying companies that purchase the cocoa
from the farmers at a minimum price to controlling the quality of the cocoa
that is brought at a set price from the buying companies when it is handed
over to the Cocoa Board at the port and marketed on the global market. The
closed system helps to avoid farmers being exposed to the variances of the
global market and also means that industry does not buy direct from Ghana
cocoa farmers.
    About UNDP:
    UNDP is the UN's global network to help people meet their development
needs and build a better life. We are on the ground in 166 countries, working
as a trusted partner with governments, civil society and the private sector to
help them build their own solutions to global and national development
challenges. Further information can be found at http://www.undp.org
SOURCE  Cadbury

Rowan Pearman of Cadbury, 0207 830 5011, rowan.pearman@csplc.com; or Chandrika
Deshpande of UNDP, 020 7396 5338, chandrika.deshpande@undp.org
